refactor(instrumentation-http): Add back support for http semconv (#5665)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-js: experimental/packages/opentelemetry-instrumentation-http/README.md

### Http instrumentation Options

> Http instrumentation has a few [configuration options](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-js/blob/e1ec4026edae53a2dea3a9a604d6d21bb5e8d99f/experimental/packages/opentelemetry-instrumentation-http/src/types.ts#L60-L93) available to choose from.

Author: Note for reviewer: I removed the links from the table and put a general link up here. It makes the table easier to work with, but more importantly, the links were no longer linking to the right place and they are fragile anyway.

Reviewer: +1 from me. I did the same in other instrumentation READMEs. Those links are a maintenance pain.

See the [HTTP semconv migration plan for OpenTelemetry JS instrumentations](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-js/issues/5646).

To select which semconv version(s) is emitted from this instrumentation, use the `OTEL_SEMCONV_STABILITY_OPT_IN` environment variable.

- `http`: emit the new (stable) v1.23.0+ semantics
- `http/dep`: emit **both** the old v1.7.0 and the new (stable) v1.23.0+ semantics
- By default, if `OTEL_SEMCONV_STABILITY_OPT_IN` includes neither of the above tokens, the old v1.7.0 semconv is used.

### Attributes collected

| v1.7.0 semconv                              | v1.23.0 semconv             | Short Description                                                              | tmp - old                                          |
| ------------------------------------------- | --------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | -------------------------------------------------- |

> | `http.client_ip`                            | `client.address`            | The IP address of the original client behind all proxies, if known             | SEMATTRS_HTTP_CLIENT_IP                            |

Author: Ha my intent was to remove that 😅  Will remove in a follow-up

### Attributes collected

| v1.7.0 semconv                              | v1.23.0 semconv             | Short Description                                                              |
| ------------------------------------------- | --------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `http.client_ip`                            | `client.address`            | The IP address of the original client behind all proxies, if known             |
| `http.flavor`                               | `network.protocol.version`  | Kind of HTTP protocol used                                                     |
| `http.host`                                 | `server.address`            | The value of the HTTP host header                                              |
| `http.method`                               | `http.request.method`       | HTTP request method                                                            |

> | `http.request_content_length`               | no change, not yet stable   | The size of the request payload body in bytes                                  |
> | `http.request_content_length_uncompressed`  | `http.request.body.size`    | The size of the uncompressed request payload body after transport decoding     |
> | `http.response_content_length`              | no change, not yet stable   | The size of the response payload body in bytes                                 |
> | `http.response_content_length_uncompressed` | `http.request.body.size`    | The size of the uncompressed response payload body after transport decoding    |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `http.request_content_length`               | (opt-in, `headersToSpanAttributes`) | The size of the request payload body in bytes. For newer semconv, use the `headersToSpanAttributes: ` option to capture this as `http.request.header.content_length`. |
| `http.request_content_length_uncompressed`  | (not included)              | The size of the uncompressed request payload body after transport decoding. (In semconv v1.23.0 this is defined by `http.request.body.size`, which is experimental and opt-in.)    |
| `http.response_content_length`              | (opt-in, `headersToSpanAttributes`) | The size of the response payload body in bytes. For newer semconv, use the `headersToSpanAttributes: ` option to capture this as `http.response.header.content_length`. |
| `http.response_content_length_uncompressed` | (not included)              | The size of the uncompressed response payload body after transport decoding. (In semconv v1.23.0 this is defined by `http.response.body.size`, which is experimental and opt-in.)    |
```

- This corrects `http.request.body.size` to `http.response.body.size` on line 99.
- Neither of `http.{request,response}.body.size` are produced by the current instr-http, unless I totally missed it. I think we could add these to isntr-http, but I think that should be in a separate PR.

Reviewer: Side note: I think the current `headersToSpanAttributes` is getting things wrong.

Using this example instrumentation and HTTP-using script: https://gist.github.com/trentm/ce3568c01d1328d0769f136c3d24d6bb

And running that via `OTEL_SEMCONV_STABILITY_OPT_IN=http node play-http.js`, I get these spans (trimmed for clarity):

```js
// client span
{
  traceId: '231454febbc08ef404100d393fd9ad00',
  parentSpanContext: {
    traceId: '231454febbc08ef404100d393fd9ad00',
    spanId: 'bee01929e2b1182e',
    traceFlags: 1,
    isRemote: true
  },
  name: 'POST',
  id: '7d5f568d5fb5de3a',
  kind: 1,
  attributes: {
    'http.request.method': 'POST',
    'url.scheme': 'http',
    'server.address': 'localhost',
    'network.peer.address': '::1',
    'network.peer.port': 64804,
    'network.protocol.version': '1.1',
    'url.path': '/',
    'client.address': '::1',
    'server.port': 3000,
    'http.request.header.content_length': [ '13' ],
    'http.response.status_code': 200
  },
  status: { code: 0 },
  events: [],
  links: []
}

// server span
{
  traceId: '231454febbc08ef404100d393fd9ad00',
  parentSpanContext: undefined,
  traceState: undefined,
  name: 'POST',
  id: 'bee01929e2b1182e',
  kind: 2,
  timestamp: 1747067420549000,
  duration: 15742.708,
  attributes: {
    'http.request.method': 'POST',
    'server.address': 'localhost',
    'server.port': 3000,
    'url.full': 'http://localhost:3000/',
    'http.response.status_code': 200,
    'network.peer.address': '::1',
    'network.peer.port': 3000,
    'network.protocol.version': '1.1',
    'http.request.header.content_length': [ 13 ],
    'http.response.header.content_length': [ '4' ]
  },
  status: { code: 0 },
  events: [],
  links: []
}
```

1. Note in the server span: ` 'http.request.header.content_length': [ 13 ],`. That value is a *number* rather than a string. That's inconsistent with other "content length" headers.
2. The normalization if the `key` (e.g. `content_length`): I don't think hyphens should be normalized to underscores. https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/semconv/http/http-spans/   The spec prose is a little ambiguous on normalization here, but the examples include usage of hyphens in the keys.

ANYway. This is all for a separate PR. I'll make a separate issue.

Reviewer: > ANYway. This is all for a separate PR. I'll make a separate issue.

https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-js/issues/5678
